Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today we're going
to look at lines and parabolas from the point of
view of calculus. In a standard treatment of the
subject, where you learn some analytic geometry
involving coordinates x and y, we learn about the
idea of expressing a linear relationship by a line
in the plane. So, we talk about lines in the form
y equals, say, 3x minus 4, or an alternate way
of thinking about that is to rearrange things to
bring everything on one side, say 3x minus y minus
4 equals 0. And that's not the only kind of line;
we could also have a line that's just y equals
something, like y equals 5, or say x equals 14.
These are all examples of lines in the plane in an
analytic geometry kind of framework. Going up one
step, we get parabolas, which are second-degree
curves in the form y equals, say, 5x squared minus
4x plus 1, or perhaps x equals 3y squared plus 2.
Now, lines and parabolas are very familiar objects
in high school, and students, of course, know
lines look like this, and parabolas are some kind
of U-shaped curves that are usually sort of rather
quickly drawn, sort of like this, and they can
be rather wide or they can be rather narrow like
that. The kinds of parabolas that are studied here
are rather of a special form; they're ones that
are lined up either up or down. So, a parabola
in the form y equals something like a quadratic
expression in x would be something like this,
or something that opens downwards, while this
kind of expression usually represents a parabola
that opens either to the right or to the left.
Now, of course, parabolas are a
special case of a conic section,
going back to the ancient Greeks, the idea being
that we take a cone, like this cone here in blue,
and we slice that cone with a plane. And depending
on the inclination of the plane to the cone,
we get different kinds of conic sections. We
could get ellipses or hyperbolas or parabolas,
and the parabola is a very special case when the
plane that we're slicing is parallel to one of the
lines of the cone. That way, we get a one-sided
figure, which is unbounded. If you move it just a
little bit like this, you would get an ellipse;
if you move it just a little bit like this,
you would get a hyperbola with two branches. So, a
parabola is a very special kind of conic section,
sort of poised between the ellipses and the
hyperbolas, just sort of on a knife edge
between the two categories. From a geometrical
point of view, a parabola appears as a rather
special object, but from the point of view of
analytic geometry that we're going to be talking
about today, it's actually a very natural
and fundamental kind of second-degree curve.
Now, the usual story that you learn in high
school and in college is that these things
should be regarded as functions. So, we should
think of y equals 3x minus 4 as a function of x,
or we should think of y equals 5x squared minus 4x
plus 1 as a function of x—in this case, a linear
function, and in this case, a quadratic function.
This is unfortunate, and I remind you that you
could have a look at Math Foundations 42 A and B,
where I discuss the problems—the very significant
problems—with defining what exactly we're talking
about when we're talking about a function. So,
it doesn't make sense to think that we already
have this idea of a function and then a linear
function or a quadratic function is something
contained inside that concept that's already
well defined. So, our approach is going to be
to not think in terms of functions. We're not
going to take this point of view. We're going
to rather think of lines and parabolas in this
analytic geometry context as being essentially
poly numbers—poly numbers of degree one and
poly numbers of degree two, and that's all. So,
they're not functions; they are just poly numbers.
So, recall that a poly number, or a
polynomial—pretty well the same thing—is
constant precisely when its degree is zero.
It's linear precisely when its degree is one,
and it's quadratic precisely when its degree
is two. So, a degree-zero poly number is just
a single number in the poly number list, and
in standard alpha form, we would just write
that as a. A linear polynomial is actually
a degree one—that's sort of degree zero,
degree one—and we would write that in
standard alpha form as a plus b alpha. So,
a quadratic polynomial has a form where
the c here in the second coefficient
place is nonzero. In standard alpha form, that
would be a plus b alpha plus c alpha squared.
Now, it may take some little getting used to
the way we're writing this line essentially
in this parabola. So, the form here is
a plus b alpha, not b plus a alpha. And
here the form is a plus b alpha plus c alpha
squared. So, if it was x instead of alpha,
we would say a plus bx plus cx squared. It's much
more usual to call the coefficient of x squared a,
so the usual form for a parabola is ax squared
plus bx plus c. Okay, so we're reversing the
coefficients because we have this orientation
that the coefficient-zero term is really where
we start, and as we progress down the list, we're
getting higher and higher coefficients, and the
thing is becoming more and more complicated.
So, for us, the start of the poly number is
really here at the constant term, and that's why
our indexing is going in this direction. We'll
see later on that that's actually quite a useful
terminology, notation, and also later on we may
adjust things a little bit. Instead of using a, b,
and c, we might use a0, a1, a2, and so on instead.
Now, throughout this discussion, you
have some choice as to whether you
want to work over the integers or,
say, over the rational numbers. So,
you can think of these numbers a, b, and
c as being integers or rational numbers,
and typically, generally, we'll try to
work in the rational number framework,
but sometimes integers also. Most of our
examples, the numbers will be integers.
Alright, so we're going to look at these
three sort of categories here, and naturally,
the first one is to look at the constant
polynomial. They are just essentially numbers,
so the arithmetic of constant poly numbers is
just exactly the same as the usual arithmetic
of ordinary numbers. And when we represent a
constant poly number in a graph, say this one
here, the constant poly number 2, well, what
are we doing? We're plotting points where the
first coordinate is some number c and the second
coordinate is the poly number evaluated at c. Now,
if I evaluate this polynomial, the points that I'm
plotting are going to have y-coordinate two—zero,
two—one, two—two, two—three, two—two—one,
two—two—two. If we had rational points,
say in three halves, it'd also be three
halves—two. So, all the plotting points
end up being on this horizontal line. So,
a constant poly number gets represented
pictorially as a horizontal line. It's a line,
but it's a special kind of one—it's a horizontal.
So, when we go up one level to degree-one
polynomials, we have a bigger story. There's more
to say; we're talking now about linear polynomial
lines. So, the typical one is something like ab in
standard alpha form, a plus b alpha. And to ensure
that the degree really is one, this constant b had
better be nonzero. So, for example, 1 2, which in
standard alpha form is 1 plus 2 alpha, that's a
linear polynomial. But not quite every line, but
most lines are linear polynomials of this kind.
This one here—let me remind you how we plot it.
We let alpha be various values, and we calculate
the value of p for those various values, and then
we plot the value c together with the value p of
c. So, when c is zero, then the value is 1, so we
plot 0 1. When c is 1, the value is 3, so we plot
a 3. When c is minus 1, the value is minus 1, so
we plot minus 1, and we get a sequence of points
like this, moving each time one over, two up,
one over, two up, one over, two up as we move
to the right, and of course to the left, down to
at every step. So, we're getting that line there.
Now, the two coefficients, the one and the
two, have a natural and important geometrical
interpretation. What's the meaning of this one?
Well, that's the value that you get when alpha is
zero—in other words, it's the coefficient
of y right above the x equals zero point.
That's usually called the y-intercept.
So, here the y-intercept is 1 because the
zeroth coefficient of this poly number is
1. And what is the significance of the 2,
the first coefficient? Well, it's the slope
of the line. And what does that mean? Well,
if we go over one in the x direction,
then we have to go up two—go over one,
up two—that means that 2 is the slope. It's how
much you have to go up or perhaps down with every
step of one over to the right. If this slope was
negative, it would mean that if we go over one,
then we would go down two. So, another way of
saying what that slope is is that it's p of 1
minus p of 0. If you plug in 1 here, and then
you plug in 0, and you take the difference,
then these two—this one here—will disappear,
and you'll just get 2. That's an algebraic way
of saying. So, we have the y-intercept of p is
p of 0, and the slope of p is p 1 minus p of 0.
Okay, and in general, if you have a plus b
alpha, then the y-intercept is this number a,
and the slope is this number b. So, it's sort of
interesting that originally when we were studying
poly numbers, we didn't really think of these
coefficients as having geometrical meaning. Now
we see that when we're graphing poly numbers
in this fashion, these numbers do have a very
natural and useful geometrical interpretation.
That's pleasant for us because we are visually
oriented and we like to work with lines. Lines
are very important kinds of mathematical objects.
Let me point out that there's two kinds of lines
that we're not getting here. First of all, we're
not getting horizontal lines. They are not linear
polynomials; lines are special because they're the
cases where the b is zero—back to that earlier
example of constants. That's a special case;
that's actually degree zero. And the other kind
of line that we're not getting is a perfectly
vertical line like this. That's not represented by
such a poly number because for every value of x,
there's only one value of y that we
plot, namely the value of the polynomial.
So, a linear polynomial is
non-horizontal and non-vertical,
but any non-horizontal or non-vertical line
can be represented as a linear poly number.
So, now that we are representing poly numbers
geometrically, we can apply geometrical concepts
to poly numbers. And for lines, a very natural
geometrical concept is the idea of parallel lines.
What does that look like algebraically? Well,
here's a line p, which is 1 2, or 1 plus 2 alpha,
and here's a line q, which is minus 4 2, or minus
4 plus 2 alpha. These lines look parallel, and
they are. Now we can see that by looking at their
slopes. Actually, it's the slopes that determine
parallel lines, because this 2 means that if we go
over one, then we have to go up 2. And this 2 here
means that if we go over one, we have to go up 2.
So, the slopes are the same; those lines really
are parallel. This one has a y-intercept
of 1; this one has a y-intercept of -4.
Another interesting geometrical notion is
that of the x-intercept—the coordinate on
the x-axis where the line crosses the x-axis.
Now, for a linear polynomial non-horizontal,
each one of them has to cross the x-axis
somewhere, and to find that x-intercept, well,
we're looking at the x value here so that the
poly number's value at that point is zero. That'll
guarantee that the point that we plot actually is
on the x-axis—it has a y-coordinate of zero. So,
we're really solving p(x) equals zero here. If
we set this equal to zero and solve for alpha,
we would get minus one-half, which is
the coordinate there. And if we set this
one equal to zero and solve for alpha, we
would get 2, which is this coordinate here.
Here's another pair of lines, r and s, and they
also look parallel. And r is minus two-thirds,
minus one-third alpha, which is now a little bit
new because we've got some rational coordinates
there. But we can rewrite this as a ratio of one
integral poly number divided by another integral
poly number—in other words, a rational poly
number. So, this is just another way of writing
this rational poly number. Let me remind you
that we said that the rational poly numbers were
the second most important field in mathematics
because we can do all the operations within that
context. So, this kind of object—the same things
apply. It has a y-intercept of minus two-thirds,
which would be about there. It has a slope of
minus one-third, so that means if you go over one,
you go down one-third—over one, down
one-third—and its x-intercept here is
minus 2. If you set this equal to zero and solve
for alpha, you would get minus 2. And here is s,
this one here, which is 2 minus one-third
alpha. It's parallel to this one because
the slopes are the same—they're both minus
one-third. This one has a y-intercept of 2,
and if you write it this way, you can see that the
x-intercept is going to be 6 out here somewhere.
So, the idea of parallel lines is very
simple: you just look at the slope,
which is the first coefficient. Now let's
think about perpendicular lines, which,
of course, is the other standard idea in
comparing lines. What does perpendicularity
look like in terms of the algebra? There are,
in fact, quite a number of different possible
definitions of perpendicularity. We're only
going to talk about the standard one here,
but if you are interested in other types
of perpendicularities, some coming from a
relativistic geometry, you can have a
look at micro-metric geometry videos,
which are in the WildTrig series from 53 to 57.
There, there's not just a blue perpendicularity,
which is the usual, but also a red and a
green one. They interact in a remarkable way.
So, our standard notion of perpendicularity—you'll
agree this is perpendicular to this. And if you
look at it, this vector here is the vector
2 1 in round brackets to denote a vector.
Here's the vector minus 1 2, and these
are perpendicular vectors. More generally,
the rule is that to get a
vector perpendicular to ab,
you interchange them and put a minus sign
in front of one of them, say minus ba.
Now, over here, this line has a slope of one-half,
because if we go over one, we go up one-half. And
this line has a slope of minus 2. The one-half
here is this divided by this, and the minus 2 is
this divided by this. So, in general, the slope
here will be b over a, and the slope here will
be a over minus b. And so the relationship
between those two slopes is that one is the
negative reciprocal of the other. In other words,
the two slopes, b and d, of the two lines—if we
write them as poly numbers—will multiply to
minus 1. Okay, so just make sure you agree
here. The slope here is one-half, the slope here
is minus 2; you multiply them together, you get
minus 1. And that's the same as here and here—b
over a times a over minus b—you get minus 1.
This is coming from geometry, right? If we were
just working with poly numbers, it didn't occur
to us to say, "Oh, it's perhaps interesting if
we have linear polynomials multiply to minus 1."
It wasn't clear that that was an interesting
thing to do. But now we see that with this
representation of poly numbers as lines in the
Cartesian plane, this condition is interesting
because it corresponds to something that's very
important geometrically—namely, perpendicularity.
There is one more important thing to say about
lines before we leave them, and that's a formula
for the meet of two lines. So, we've talked about
this before when we were talking about geometry
in the Cartesian setting. We already talked about
lines as geometrical objects, but they were things
of this form here, and we talked about formulas
for the meet or the intersection of two lines. So,
it's a similar story here, but now we're talking
about everything in terms of poly numbers. So,
let's first of all introduce a notion of
incidence. When a point, say xy, lies on
a poly number p, we'll say that xy lies on p,
which is a plus b alpha, precisely when y equals
a plus bx. In other words, this is exactly the
condition that this be a point that we use to plot
this poly number. If we replace alpha with x, then
we get p(x) right here. So, this is actually p of
that, and we'll say that this point lies on the
poly number. That's an algebraic reflection of the
operation of drawing a point and saying that point
lies on the poly number or is part of the graph.
Now, this particular relation is a linear
relation. It can also be rewritten as bx
minus y plus a equals zero. And if you go back
to Math Foundations 24 and have a look at lines,
you'll see that this kind of linear equation is
represented by the line that we called b 2 minus
one-half a, with some pointy brackets representing
a Euclidean line. So, whether we're talking
about this poly number a plus b alpha or we're
thinking geometrically about this line, we're
talking about two things which are pretty close
to being the same. They're not really the same,
but we can certainly, in our minds, compare them
and think of them as being effectively the same.
So, in this video, we stated an important
theorem—the meet of lines theorem—and now
I'm just going to restate that theorem in terms
of poly numbers instead of lines. So, if you have
two poly numbers, p1 is a1 plus b1 alpha, and p2
is a2 plus b2 alpha, and they're not parallel,
so in other words, the two slopes b1, b2 are
not equal, then there is exactly one point which
lies on them both—namely, here it is. Here's
the unique point which lies on both of these
two linear polynomial lines. The x-coordinate
is (a1 - a2) / (b2 - b1). The y-coordinate is
(a1 b2 - a2 b1) / (b2 - b1). And you can see why
we require the slopes to be different because if
they weren't different, we'd be having zeros
here in the denominator, which is not good.
Alright, so I'm gonna leave this to you
as an exercise. Please compare this with
the formula in Math Foundations 24
for the meet of lines theorem stated
in terms of lines like that. It's very
instructive to compare these things.
Alright, so those are really the main things that
high school students learn about lines. Lines are
pretty simple things for us—they're just poly
numbers with two entries instead of one. It's
one step up from a number. Now it's time to
go one step more, to go to poly numbers with
degree 2. Now, that looks like parabolas. Going
from lines to parabolas is a big step up. So,
let's now introduce quadratic polynomials—more
parabolas—and we're going to derive some of the
main facts about them, which follows and in some
sense is kind of a review of things that we've
already done in the last few videos. So, I hope
this is more or less familiar to you if you have
watched those videos before, but perhaps they'll
be a good summary and review of those facts.
First of all, what is a quadratic polynomial?
It's just a poly number of degree 2 consisting
of three coefficients, a plus b alpha plus c alpha
squared, and we insist that that third one, the c,
be nonzero. And I remind you, once again, this is
a somewhat non-standard form. Okay, in terms of x,
this is a plus bx plus cx squared. And we'll make
the same definition that we did for lines: we'll
say that the point xy lies on the poly number
p precisely when if you plug in x for alpha,
you get y. So, y is equal to a plus bx plus cx
squared. So, these are just exactly the points
that we actually plot when we're drawing
a diagram or a graph of the polynomial.
We talked about the Taylor by poly number and the
sub-derivatives—it's an absolutely fundamental
kind of thing for calculus. Let's do it here
in this quadratic situation where we can see
everything explicitly, and it's instructive. So,
what is p of alpha plus beta? That's the Taylor
by poly number of p—it's what you get when you
replace the alpha with alpha plus beta, going from
a poly number to a bi-poly number. So, when a plus
b alpha plus beta for c alpha plus beta squared,
we expand that out—a plus b alpha plus b beta plus
c alpha squared plus c times 2 alpha beta plus
c beta squared—and then we group those various
terms into the ones that don't involve any betas,
the ones that just involve a single beta, namely
this one and this one, and the ones involving beta
squared, which is only this one here. We see
the original poly number recovered, so this,
what we call the 0th sub-derivative, is just
the original poly number p. This one here is
very interesting and important—this coefficient
of beta is what we call the first sub-derivative,
or just the derivative of p. Right, so
the derivative of p, by definition, is the
coefficient of beta in the Taylor by poly number,
and there it is there. It's b plus 2c alpha,
so it's this thing here without an alpha, plus 2c
times alpha. And we also can read off the second
sub-derivative, which is the coefficient of beta
squared. In this case, it's just a poly number c,
the constant polynomial. So, these are the two
sub-derivatives of this quadratic polynomial;
the other sub-derivatives
are all zero past this point.
Now, the Taylor by poly number was symmetric in
alpha and beta, so we can interchange the alphas
and betas in the previous equation and write
it now as a combination of powers of alpha. So,
we're just replacing alphas and betas in
the previous. Well, now what we'll do in
the next couple of steps is very important,
okay, so make sure you understand what we're
doing here. The next step is just a rewrite where
we're gonna replace beta, which is a poly number,
with a number, and let's use the number r.
Previously, for a constant, I was using number c,
but that's not going to work too well because
there's already a c in our equation, and d is
not going to work either because in a little
while we're going to go to cubic polynomials,
ds as well, and their coefficients. So, r is
nice and safe—we're not likely to get up to
that very soon. So, r is a constant; replace
beta with r—just there's r, there's an r,
and there's nothing there. Okay, so
this is just another equation—this is
now an equation just involving the poly
number, a simple poly number in alpha.
And now what we're gonna do is we're going to
replace here alpha with alpha minus r—it's a
translation of this. And we'll replace alpha with
alpha minus r. Well, this becomes just alpha,
and the alpha here becomes alpha minus r,
and otherwise it's completely unchanged.
So, just this changes, this changes,
and this changes. But this is now a very
important expression—this is the Taylor
expansion of p at r. So, we're thinking about
r as being a particular value on the line,
and this is now a formula that tells us how to
evaluate the polynomial at a random point alpha
just in terms of the differences between alpha
and r and the various powers of those differences.
This is a very important formula, this Taylor
expansion, and what it allows us to do, amongst
other things, is to read off the various tangents
to a poly number. So, for a quadratic polynomial,
there's really only one interesting
tangent, which is the first tangent,
which is what you get when you look at all the
things here of degree 1. So, the first tangent
of p at r is this plus this. We're just dropping
the quadratic terms. Now we do some arithmetic;
we're going to expand this out as a poly number
in alpha. It means we have to multiply this minus
r here, so there's going to be a minus r times
b here, which is conveniently going to cancel
with this br here. So, there's still an a, but
what happens to the cr squared? Why does it
become minus cr squared? Well, it's because here
also there will be a minus 2 cr squared. There's
another term multiplying r there, so those minus
two of them will subtract from the one of them
to give minus 1 cr squared. And then the terms
involving alpha will be just the way they were
before—b plus 2c r times alpha. What is this?
This is a linear polynomial—coefficients a, b,
and c of the poly number, and the particular
value at which we're evaluating the number r.
So, this is a formula for
the general first tangent,
or the tangent line, to p at r. It's
a useful and important formula because
it tells us how to calculate quickly the
tangent line to a parabola at any point.
So, let's look at an example. Here is
a poly number, a quadratic polynomial,
5 minus 4 alpha squared. Okay, so I'm going
to leave it to you to check that the first
derivative is minus 3 minus 8 alpha, and the
second sub-derivative is minus 4—this one is
half of the second derivative, it's minus 4.
Okay, and here's that formula for the tangent
line that we wrote down—that's the general
formula for a general quadratic polynomial,
get 5 plus 4r squared minus 3 plus 8r all times
alpha. So, this is a linear polynomial—evaluating
that. So, we can choose different values of
r here, and for every one of those values,
we can calculate a tangent line to this
parabola. Here's the actual value of the
poly number—a graph of the polynomial—a graph. As
I explained last time, we are only going so far,
and this is a rather crude one. I'm only
looking at more or less half-integral values,
and actually, the topic appears at minus
3/8—that's when the derivative is zero.
Okay, so what do various tangent lines look like?
Well, at zero—so, at this point here—we replace
r with zero, we get 5 minus 3 alpha. And if we
graph that, that's got a y-intercept of 5 and
a slope of minus 3, so it goes down at minus
3, minus 3—there it is right there—that's the
tangent line to p at zero. The tangent line to p
at 1—let me check—there it is right there, it's 9
minus 11 alpha—that's the equation of that line.
At minus 1, we get 9 plus 5 alpha. At minus 3/8,
which is right here, we get 89 over 16. In that
case, the first tangent becomes actually not a
linear poly number but rather a constant poly
number, so it's a special case. And in fact,
this is a rather important point on this
parabola, because that horizontal tangent
line means that the parabola has a maximum there.
So, the fact that we're not getting a linear poly
number is corresponding to the fact that there's
something rather special about the point minus 3/8
for this parabola. And at minus 3, right over
here, the tangent line is 41 plus 21 alpha.
Now, I want to point something out to you—a
rather interesting little observation. Have
a look at these two tangent lines—the tangent
line at 1 and at minus 1. These two tangent
lines have the property that their y-intercepts
are both 9, which means that they meet right at
this point here, right on the x-axis, as it turns
out, right on the y-axis, at the point 9. Now,
that might be a little bit interesting because
the parabola itself is not symmetrical around this
line—the maximum is actually right there. So, the
thing turns out actually to be symmetrical there,
as we'll see in the next lecture. But there's
something curious about the fact that we go equal
coordinates away from zero and take the tangents,
we get their meeting at zero. You can check now
that the y-intercepts of the tangent at r and the
tangent at minus r are always equal, no matter
what r is like. That's obvious from here because
the y-intercept is this one here, and if you
replace r with minus r, that y-intercept is not
changing. So, it means that if we took the tangent
at 3, just somewhere there, and this tangent at
minus 3, that they are going to meet exactly on
the y-axis. This was a little exercise—you can
see if you can generalize that. What's really
happening with this phenomenon? Can you state a
more general fact? We'll see how you do next time.
Next time, we're going to look at this parabola
and problems in general in more detail. There's
quite a lot of remarkable additional
features that parabolas have—they're
very fabulous mathematical objects, in
fact. So, I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.